.\"
.\" $Id$
.\" $Revision$
.\"
.\" mkconfig.7
.\"
.\" Copyright 2010 Brad Lanam  Walnut Creek CA USA
.\"
.\" brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com
.\"
.\"
.\"  Notes on terminology:
.\"    check variable - the variable name for the check.
.\"    check command - a command from the mkconfig config file.
.\"    mkconfig config file - file where mkconfig check commands are read from
.\"       not to be confused with "config.h".
.\"    output file - file to which language units output is written
.\"    options file -
.\"    cache file -
.\"    lib file - output libraries file created by mkreqlib.sh
.\"
.\" from perl manual pages...
.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text
.ft R
.fi
..
.\"
.TH mkconfig 7 "11 Jul 2010"
.SH Name
mkconfig \- build configuration utilities
.SH Synopsis
.\" mkconfig.sh [-C] [-c <cache-file>]
.\"       [-o <option-file>] [-L <log-file>] config-file
.\" mkreqlib.sh [-c <cache-file>] [-l <lib-file>] input-file
.\" mkcsetopt.sh [-o <option-file>] option value
.\" runtests.sh <tests-dir> [test1, ...]
.B mkconfig.sh
[\fB\-C\fP]
[\fB\-c\fP <cache\-file>]
[\fB\-L\fP <log\-file>]
[\fB\-o\fP <option\-file>]
config\-file
.PP
The \-C option clears any cache file before processing the units.
.PP
cache\-file defaults to 'mkconfig.cache'.
.PP
log\-file defaults to 'mkconfig.log'.
.PP
option\-file defaults to 'options.dat'.
.PP
config\-file is a file containing a list of mkconfig check commands.
.PP
.B mkreqlib.sh
[\fB\-c\fP <cache\-file>]
[\fB\-l\fP <lib\-file>]
input\-file
.PP
cache\-file defaults to 'mkconfig.cache'.
.PP
output\-file defaults to 'mkconfig.reqlibs'.
.PP
input\-file is the C/C++ output\-file created by mkconfig.sh.
.PP
.B mkcsetopt.sh
[\fB\-o\fP <option\-file>]
option value
.PP
option\-file defaults to 'options.dat'.
.PP
.B runtests.sh
tests\-dir
[test1, ...]
.PP
tests\-dir is a directory containing test scripts.
.PP
The tests to be run may be specified on the command line.
.SH Description
\fImkconfig.sh\fP
is a build configuration utility.
It is written in portable shell script and
designed to be extensible for any configuration use.  Most Bourne
Shell compatible shells will work.
.PP
\fImkconfig.sh\fP
is intended to generate a file that can be used as an included file,
a shell script, a configuration file, or any other use.  If the
_MKCONFIG_SHELL environment variable is set to a particular shell,
\fImkconfig.sh\fP will restart itself using that shell.
.PP
\fImkreqlib.sh\fP
is used in conjunction with the c\-main language unit to output the
libraries required for linking.  See the description for the 'lib'
check routine for the c\-main language unit below.
.PP
\fImkcsetopt.sh\fP
is a utility used to change the value of the options in the option file.
.PP
\fIruntests.sh\fP
is a simple test harness for mkconfig.  It is intended as a simple,
portable test harness.  There are better test harnesses available.
.SH Basic Check Commands (mkconfig.sh)
.TP
\fB#\fP comment
.br
Comments begin with a '#' in column 1.  Blank lines are ignored.
.TP
\fBoutput\fP file\-name (required)
.br
Specify the name of the output file.
This command may be included multiple times in the mkconfig
configuration file to output multiple files.
.TP
\fBoption\-file\fP file\-name
.br
Specify the name of the options file.  The options file can also be
specified on the command line with the \-o option.
.TP
\fBloadunit\fP unit\-name
.br
Include a mkconfig unit for testing.
Units may include specific check routines that may be performed.
.TP
\fBcommand\fP name\-of\-command
.br
Check if command exists in the path.
.IP
e.g.: command sed
.br
Output: _command_sed
.TP
\fBifoption\fP option\-name ... [else ...] endif
.TP
\fBifnotoption\fP option\-name ... [else ...] endif
.RS
The \fIifoption\fP and \fIifnotoption\fP statements check the options
setting in the options file and process the appropriate block of statements.
This value is not cached.
.PP
If there is no options file, or the option does not exist, both
\fIifoption\fP and \fIifnotoption\fP will return a false return.
.PP
The \fIifoption\fP, \fIifnotoption\fP and \fIif\fP statements may be
nested.
.RE
.TP
\fBif\fP label if\-statement ... [else ...] endif
.RS
The \fIif\fP statement is a combination of check variables, &&, ||,
! (not) and parentheses.  It is recommended that parentheses be used
copiously to avoid any possible precedence differences between different
shells.  Only boolean tests are currently supported.
This value is not cached.
.PP
e.g. if mylabel _lib_func1 && _hdr_header1 && ( ! (_lib_func3 || _lib_func4)) &&
_setint_my_var
.PP
The \fIifoption\fP, \fIifnotoption\fP and \fIif\fP statements may be
nested.
.RE
.TP
.B include endinclude
.br
Include all of the code between these two tags
in the output file.  Backslashes must
be escaped with a backslash.
.TP
\fBoption\fP option\-name default\-value
.RS
Set \fIoption\-name\fP specified to default\-value.  The option\-file is
checked for \fIoption\-name\fP, and if present, the value in the
option\-file is used.
.PP
Internally, the check variable is named _opt_option\-name.
.RE
.TP
\fBset\fP check\-variable value
.br
Set a check\-variable to a value.  The check\-variable must already exist.
This value is not saved in the cache.
.IP
e.g.
.br
lib quotactl
.br
set _lib_quotactl 0
.TP
\fBsetint\fP check\-variable\-name value
.br
Set an integer variable to a value.  The check variable name will be output as
specified, but when used in if statements, the check variable is named
_setint_<name>.
This value is not saved in the cache.
.IP
e.g. setint _enable_nls 1
.TP
\fBsetstr\fP check\-variable\-name value
.br
Set a string variable to a value.  The check variable name will be output as
specified, but when used in if statements, the check variable is named
_setstr_<name>.
This value is not saved in the cache.
.IP
e.g. setstr _my_lib_path /lib
.TP
\fBstandard\fP
.br
Perform any standard checks for the unit that was loaded.  See the
description of the other units to see what the standard check does.
.SH Environment Units
The environment units create an output file that can be used
as shell script input to set your environment.
.TP
.B env-systype
.br
The systype environment unit determines what type, revision and
architecture of the system you are running on.
.RS
.TP
\fBsystem\fP {type|rev|arch}
.br
The type, rev and arch check commands will create
the _MKCONFIG_SYSTYPE, _MKCONFIG_SYSREV, and _MKCONFIG_SYSARCH
environment variables respectively.  These
correspond to the output of uname -s, uname -r and uname -m.
On AIX, the oslevel check command is used to attempt to resolve the revision
of the operating system.  On MacOSX, the revision is currently unchanged and
does not correspond to the marketing version.
.RE
.PP
.TP
.B env-cflags
.br
The cflags environment unit determines basic flags needed to run the
C compiler.  Since these units are interdependent on each other, they
should be configured in the order: cc, using_gcc, cflags, ldflags, and libs.
.RS
.TP
\fBcc\fP
.br
Determines the C compiler being used (default cc).
Sets the CC environment variable.
.TP
\fBusing_gcc\fP
.br
Sets the _MKCONFIG_USING_GCC environment variable to 'Y' if the gcc
compiler is being used.
.TP
\fBcflags\fP
.br
Sets the CFLAGS environment variable according to the 'getconf' program
and appropriate to the operating system and compiler.
.TP
\fBldflags\fP
.br
Sets the LDFLAGS environment variable according to the 'getconf' program
and appropriate to the operating system and compiler.
.TP
\fBlibs\fP
.br
Sets the LIBS environment variable according to the 'getconf' program
and appropriate to the operating system and compiler.
.RE
.TP
.B env-extension
.RS
.TP
\fBextension\fP {obj|exe}
.br
The obj and exe arguments correspond to the OBJ_EXT and EXE_EXT
environment variables. These two variables are set to the
object file extension (.o, .obj) and executable file
extension (none or .exe) per the operating system and compiler.
.RE
.TP
.B env-msgfmt
.RS
.TP
\fBcmd_msgfmt\fP
.br
Sets the XMSGFMT environment variable to the path of the
msgfmt or gmsgfmt command, if any.
.RE
.SH C Language Units
.TP
.B c\-main
.br
The c\-main unit creates an include file for C programs.
The \fIhdr\fP and \fIsys\fP directives should be listed first
in the mkconfig configuration file so that the headers are
available for use in the other tests.
.RS
.TP
\fBstandard\fP
.RS
The \fIstandard\fP checks are for: the headers stdio.h, stdlib.h, sys/types.h
and sys/param.h, the keywords \fIvoid\fP and \fIconst\fP, the
\fIvoid *\fP type as a parameter,
and C function prototypes.
.PP
Output: _hdr_stdio, _hdr_stdlib, _sys_types, _sys_param,
_key_void, _key_const, _param_void_star and _proto_stdc.
.RE
.TP
\fBhdr\fP name\-of\-header [required\-headers]
.br
Check for a header.
The standard include path as set in CFLAGS is used.
If \fIrequired\-headers\fP is specified, those headers
are included in the compilation test before attempting
the compilation test.
.IP
e.g. hdr storage/volumes.h gui/window.h
.br
Output: _hdr_storage_volumes, _hdr_gui_window
.TP
\fBsys\fP name\-of\-sys\-header [required\-headers]
.br
Like \fIhdr\fP, but looks in the sys/ directory.
.IP
e.g. sys types.h
.br
Output: _sys_types
.TP
\fBclass\fP class [libs, ...]
.br
Check to see if class \fIclass\fP exists.
If the optional \fIlibs\fP are specified,
the test will try first without the libraries, then with
the first set of libraries specified, then the next set, etc.
Sets of libraries to be tested are separated by commas.
.IP
e.g.: class os::Volumes
.br
Output: _class_os__Volumes
.RS
.PP
Execute \fImkreqlib.sh\fP after creating the output file
to output the libraries required for linking.  See the usage for
\fImkreqlib.sh\fP in the lib check below.
.RE
.TP
\fBconst\fP constant\-name [required\-headers]
.br
Check to see that a constant exists.
If \fIrequired\-headers\fP is specified, those headers
are included in the compilation test before attempting
the compilation test.
.IP
e.g. const O_RDONLY
.br
Output: _const_O_RDONLY
.TP
\fBdcl\fP {int|ptr} variable\-name
.br
Check to see if \fIvariable\-name\fP is declared.
If \fIint\fP is specified, the variable is a numeric type.
If \fIptr\fP is specified, the variable is a pointer type.
.IP
e.g. dcl int errno; dcl ptr optarg
.br
Output: _dcl_errno, _dcl_optarg
.TP
\fBdefine\fP definition\-name
.br
Check to see if definition\-name is defined.
.br
.IP
e.g. define MOUNT_LOFS
.br
Output: _define_mount_lofs
.TP
\fBkey\fP keyword
.br
Check to see if a C\-language keyword is reserved.
.IP
e.g. key volatile
.br
Output: _key_volatile
.TP
\fBlib\fP function [libs, ...]
.br
Check to see if library function \fIfunction\fP exists.
If the optional \fIlibs\fP are specified,
the test will try first without the libraries, then with
the first set of libraries specified linked in, then the next set, etc.
Sets of libraries to be tested are separated by commas.
If link libraries are specified, any value in the cache is ignored,
and the function is retested.
.IP
e.g. lib gettext -lintl, -lintl -liconv
will first test gettext, then gettext -lintl, then gettext -lintl -liconv.
.br
Output: _lib_gettext
.RS
.PP
Execute \fImkreqlib.sh\fP after creating the output file
to output the libraries required for linking.
.PP
\fImkreqlib.sh\fP creates the list of libraries required for linking
based on the output file.  This allows the user to modify
the output file and only the necessary libraries will be
linked in.
.PP
\fImkreqlib.sh\fP is executed with a command line argument of the
output file name created by \fImkconfig.sh\fP.
The output library file defaults to 'mkconfig.reqlibs',
but may be changed with the \-l command line option.
.PP
The string '_dollar_', if included in the library function name
will be replaced with the '$' symbol.
.RE
.TP
\fBmember\fP struct struct-name member
.br
\fBmember\fP typedef-name member
.br
Check to see if \fImember\fP is a member of \fIstruct struct-name\fP
or \fItypedef-name\fP.
.IP
e.g.: member struct statfs f_bsize
.br
Output: _mem_struct_statfs_f_bsize
.TP
\fBnpt\fP function [library\-requirement]
.br
Check to see if if \fIfunction\fP needs to have a prototype declared.
The optional \fIlibrary\-requirement\fP should be written
as: _lib_<funcname>.
If \fIlibrary\-requirement\fP does not exist, _npt_<function>
will be set to false in the output file.
.IP
e.g. npt getopt; npt statfs _lib_statfs
.br
Output: _npt_getopt
.TP
\fBtyp\fP type\-name
.br
Check to see if a type\-name exists.  type\-name may be a type or a
structure.
.IP
e.g. typ size_t; typ struct tm
.br
Output: _typ_size_t, _typ_struct_tm
.RE
.TP
.B c\-statfs\-args
.RS
.TP
\fBstatfs_args\fP
.br
Checks to see how many arguments the statfs() system call accepts.
.br
Output: _statfs_args
.RE
.TP
.B c\-setmntent\-args
.RS
.TP
\fBsetmentent_args\fP
.br
Check to see how many arguments the setmntent() system call accepts.
.br
Output: _setmntent_args
.RE
.TP
.B c\-include\-conflict
.RS
.TP
\fBinclude_conflict <header\-1> <header\-2>\fP
.br
Check to see if there is a compile conflict when including two headers.
If there is a conflict, the check variable is set to 0.
.IP
e.g. include_conflict time.h sys/time.h
.br
Output: _inc_conflict__hdr_time__sys_time
.RE
.TP
.B c\-quotactl
.RS
.TP
\fBquotactl_pos\fP
.br
Check to see if character argument is argument 1 or 2 for the quotactl()
library function.
.RE
.SH Tests (runtests.sh)
The test directory contains shell scripts that are executed
by \fIruntests.sh\fP.  If a 'test_order' file exists in the test
directory, it indicates the order the tests are run in.  The 'test_order'
file consists of a pass number followed by the test name (no trailing .sh).
If the 'test_order' file exists, only those tests in the file will be run.
.PP
If there is a test failure, testing will continue until a change in
pass number occurs.
.SH Writing a mkconfig Unit (mkconfig.sh)
\fImkconfig.sh\fP reads the mkconfig configuration file and processes
each line sequentially.  The \fIoutput\-file\fP command specifies the output
file (e.g. config.h for the c-main language unit).  A language unit is
loaded with the \fIloadunit\fP command.
.PP
Each language unit script is executed with the unix shell source
(\fB.\fP) command, so it has all of the general
shell functions from mkconfig.sh available for use.
.PP
The following functions from mkconfig.sh are used by the language units:
printlabel, checkcache, checkcache_val, checkcache_actual,
printyesno, printyesno_val,
printyesno_actual, getdata, setdata, require_unit,
dosubst, doappend, domath, toupper, tolower, and locatecmd.
.PP
A language unit must provide the following functions: preconfigfile,
output_item, stdconfigfile, postconfigfile, output_other.
.PP
\fImkconfig.sh\fP
provides the following generic checks: command, include/endinclude,
ifoption, ifnotoption, if, set, setint, setstr, and option.  The set,
setint, setstr and option commands will execute the \fIoutput_item\fP
function from the current unit.  Any other unrecognized
commands will be passed on
to the language unit that has been loaded.
.PP
The flow of control by \fImkconfig.sh\fP is:
.RS 3
process the commands from the mkconfig configuration file
.RS 3
set the output\-file name.
.br
load any units as specified by the loadunit commands from the
mkconfig.units directory.
.br
execute the check commands as specified by the mkconfig configuration file.
.br
.RE
save the cache file.
.br
execute \fIpreconfigfile\fP from the language unit.
.br
execute \fIoutput_item\fP for each configuration item.
.br
execute \fIstdconfigfile\fP from the language unit.
.br
output any \fIinclude\fP text from the mkconfig configuration file.
.br
execute \fIpostconfigfile\fP from the language unit.
.br
execute \fIoutput_other\fP from the language unit.
.RE
.PP
A language unit must define the functions listed above.  It may also
define other functions for use by other units for that language.
.PP
The main language unit must set the following shell variables:
.RS 3
_MKCONFIG_PREFIX is set to a language unit specific prefix.  This prefix
is used internally and in the cache files to create a unique name.
.PP
_MKCONFIG_HASEMPTY is set to T or F.  If true, the language unit may
set check variables to empty values.  This modifies certain processing
in \fImkconfig.sh\fP.  It is faster to have non-empty check variables.
.PP
_MKCONFIG_EXPORT is set to T or F.  If true, the check variable is set and
exported so that it can be accessed in the shell environment.
.RE
.PP
Language units may need other functions as defined in other units.
The \fIrequire_unit\fP function makes sure that the a particular
language unit is loaded for use by the calling unit.
.PP
A typical check command in a language unit will be structured as
follows:
.RS 3
.Vb
check_somecheck () {
  chktype=$1
  checkarg=$2

  name="_somecheck_${checkarg}"
  printlabel $name "somecheck: ${checkarg}"
  checkcache ${_MKCONFIG_PREFIX} $name
  if [ $rc -eq 0 ]; then return; fi   # found it in cache
  # do processing for check here
  retval=1
  printyesno $name $retval
  setdata ${_MKCONFIG_PREFIX} $name $retval
}
.Ve
.RE
The check function's arguments will be the same values read
from the mkconfig configuration file.  The name should be set
to _<checkname>_<argument> as appropriate to be a unique name
that is a valid unix shell variable name.
.SH Internal Function Definitions (mkconfig.sh)
.TP
\fBcheckcache\fP prefix name
.TP
\fBcheckcache_val\fP prefix name
.TP
\fBcheckcache_actual\fP prefix name
.br
\fIcheckcache\fP checks the cache to see if the check variable
already has a value.  If so, the check variable is set to the value and a
return code of 0 is returned.  \fIprefix\fP is normally $_MKCONFIG_PREFIX and
\fIname\fP is the name of the check variable.  The different variants
of \fIcheckcache\fP correspond to the variants of \fIprintyesno\fP
for displaying the check variable to the user.
.TP
\fBdosubst\fP shellvar pattern repl [pattern repl ...]
.br
Substitutes \fIrepl\fP for \fIpattern\fP globally throughout
\fIshellvar\fP.  Multiple patterns and replacement strings may be
specified.  \fIpattern\fP may be any regular expression recognized
by 'sed'.  Note that modern 'sed' regular expressions will not be
supported on all systems.
.TP
\fBdoappend\fP shellvar value
.br
Appends value to \fIshellvar\fP.
.TP
\fBdomath\fP shellvar "math\-expr"
.br
Executes the \fImath\-expr\fP and assigns the returned value to
\fIshellvar\fP.  \fImath\-expr\fP must be quoted and should have
spaces around all arguments.
.br
e.g.  count=1; domath count "$count + 1"; echo $count # 2
.TP
\fBgetdata\fP shellvar prefix name
.br
In some cases, the check function may need to retrieve the value of
a check variable.  The \fIgetdata\fP function returns the value of
the check variable \fIname\fP in the shell variable \fIshellvar\fP.
\fIprefix\fP is normally ${_MKCONFIG_PREFIX}.
.TP
\fBlocatecmd\fP shellvar command
.br
Locates a command in the path.  Sets \fIshellvar\fP to the full path
of the command.
.TP
\fBprintlabel\fP name display\-data
.br
\fIprintlabel\fP displays \fIdisplay\-data\fP to the screen followed by an
ellipsis.  The name and display\-data is also logged to the log file.
.TP
\fBprintyesno\fP name value
.TP
\fBprintyesno_val\fP name value
.TP
\fBprintyesno_actual\fP name value
.br
\fIprintyesno\fP is used in conjunction with \fIprintlabel\fP.
\fIprintlabel\fP displays the first part of the output for the user and
\fIprintyesno\fP displays the result.  \fIprintyesno\fP is used for
boolean (0 or 1) values.  It will display 'yes' or 'no'.
\fIprintyesno_val\fP is used for values that are non-zero or a string.
It will display the value, or 'no' if set to 0.  \fIprintyesno_actual\fP
is used for values that should be displayed intact.  It will display
the actual value (0 or otherwise).
.TP
\fBrequire_unit\fP unit\-name
.br
\fIrequire_unit\fP loads another unit file that is needed by the calling
unit.
.TP
\fBsetdata\fP prefix name value
.br
\fIsetdata\fP is used in a check function to set the value of a check
variable.  \fIprefix\fP is normally ${_MKCONFIG_PREFIX}.  \fIname\fP
is the
name of the check variable.  \fIvalue\fP is the value the check variable
is set to.  \fIvalue\fP should be enclosed in quotation marks if it has
spaces or other special shell characters.
.TP
\fBtoupper\fP shellvar
.br
Converts a shell variable to upper case.
.TP
\fBtolower\fP shellvar
.br
Coverts a shell variable to lower case.
.SH Environment Variables (mkconfig.sh)
.TP
_MKCONFIG_DIR
The directory where mkconfig.sh is installed.
.SH File Descriptors (mkconfig.sh)
The file descriptors are allocated as follows:
.br
9 - The mkconfig log file
.br
8 - Used by mkconfig.sh; not available for mkconfig unit scripts.
.br
7 - Used by mkconfig.sh; not available for mkconfig unit scripts.
.br
6 - Used by c\-main.sh and mkconfig.sh; not available for c language unit scripts.
.br
4 - Used by c\-main.sh; not available for c language unit scripts.
.SH Writing a test script (runtests.sh)
To be completed.
.SH Environment Variables (runtests.sh)
.TP
_MKCONFIG_DIR
.br
The directory where mkconfig.sh is installed.
.TP
_MKCONFIG_RUNTOPDIR
.br
The original directory where the tests were started.
.TP
_MKCONFIG_RUNTSTDIR
.br
The directory containing the test scripts and associated
files.
.TP
_MKCONFIG_RUNTMPDIR
.br
The top level temporary directory.  Sub\-directories
are created for each test that is run.
.TP
_MKCONFIG_TSTRUNTMPDIR
.br
The temporary directory in which the test is run.
.TP
shelllist
.br
A list of valid shells installed on the system.
.SH See Also
iffe(1) autoconf(1) dist(7)
.SH Bugs
Send bug reports to: brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com
.SH Website
http://www.gentoo.com/di/mkconfig.html
.SH Author
This program is Copyright 2010 by Brad Lanam, Walnut Creek CA
.PP
Brad Lanam, Walnut Creek, CA (brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com)
