.\"
.\" $Id$
.\" $Revision$
.\"
.\" mkconfig_c.7
.\"
.\" Copyright 2011 Brad Lanam  Walnut Creek CA USA
.\"
.\" brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com
.\"
.\"
.\"  Notes on terminology:
.\"    check variable - the variable name for the check.
.\"    directive - a command from the mkconfig config file.
.\"    mkconfig config file - file where mkconfig directive are read from
.\"       not to be confused with "config.h".
.\"    output file - file to which language units output is written
.\"    options file -
.\"    cache file -
.\"    lib file - output libraries file created by mkreqlib.sh
.\"
.\" from perl manual pages...
.de Vb \" Begin verbatim text
.ft CW
.nf
.ne \\$1
..
.de Ve \" End verbatim text
.ft R
.fi
..
.\"
.TH mkconfig_c 7 "8 Nov 2011"
.SH Name
mkconfig_c \- mkconfig C language units
.\" .SH Synopsis
.SH Description
The C language units create an include file for use by C programs.
.SH C Language Units
.TP
.B c\-main
.br
The c\-main unit creates an include file for C programs.
The \fIhdr\fP and \fIsys\fP directives should be listed first
in the mkconfig configuration file so that the headers are
available for use in the other tests.
.RS
.TP
\fBstandard\fP
.RS
The \fIstandard\fP checks are: the headers stdio.h, stdlib.h, sys/types.h
and sys/param.h, the keywords \fIvoid\fP and \fIconst\fP, the
\fIvoid *\fP type as a parameter,
and C function prototypes.
.PP
.Vb
.B Output:
#define _hdr_stdio 1
#define _hdr_stdlib 1
#define _sys_types 1
#define _sys_param 1
#define _key_void 1
#define _key_const 1
#define _param_void_star 1
#define _proto_stdc 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBargs\fP [noconst] name\-of\-function
.RS
Checks the number of arguments, the types of the arguments and
the return type for a function.  If 'noconst' is specified, any
'const' keywords will be stripped from the output so only the base
data type is returned.  Outputs the following check variables:
_args_function, _c_arg_N_function, and _c_type_function.
_args_function indicates the number of
arguments. _c_arg_N_function indicates the argument data type.
_c_type_function indicates the return type of the function.
The 'awk' program is a requirement for this directive.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
args noconst setmntent
.B Output:
#define _c_arg_1_setmntent char *
#define _c_arg_2_setmntent char *
#define _c_type_setmntent FILE *
#define _args_setmntent 2
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBhdr\fP name\-of\-header [required\-headers]
.RS
Check for a header.
The standard include path as set in CFLAGS is used.
If \fIrequired\-headers\fP is specified, those headers
are included in the compilation test before attempting
the compilation test.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
hdr getopt
hdr storage/volumes.h gui/window.h
.B Output:
#define _hdr_getopt 1
#define _hdr_storage_volumes 0
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBsys\fP name\-of\-sys\-header [required\-headers]
.RS
Like \fIhdr\fP, but looks in the sys/ directory.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
sys types.h
.B Output:
#define _sys_types 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBclass\fP class [libs, ...]
.RS
Check to see if class \fIclass\fP exists.
If the optional \fIlibs\fP are specified,
the test will try first without the libraries, then with
the first set of libraries specified, then the next set, etc.
Sets of libraries to be tested are separated by commas.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
class os::Volumes
.B Output:
#define _class_os__Volumes 0
.Ve
.PP
Execute \fImkc.sh \-reqlib\fP after creating the output file
to output the libraries required for linking.  See the usage for
\fImkc.sh \-reqlib\fP in the lib check below.
.RE
.TP
\fBconst\fP constant\-name [required\-headers]
.RS
Check to see that a constant exists.
If \fIrequired\-headers\fP is specified, those headers
are included in the compilation test before attempting
the compilation test.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
const O_NOCTTY
.B Output:
#define _const_O_NOCTTY 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBdcl\fP {int|ptr} variable\-name
.RS
Check to see if \fIvariable\-name\fP is declared.
If \fIint\fP is specified, the variable is a numeric type.
If \fIptr\fP is specified, the variable is a pointer type.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
dcl int errno
dcl ptr optarg
.B Output:
#define _dcl_errno 1
#define _dcl_optarg 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBdefine\fP definition\-name
.RS
Check to see if definition\-name is defined.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
define MCTL_QUERY
.B Output:
#define _define_MCTL_QUERY 0
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBkey\fP keyword
.RS
Check to see if a C\-language keyword is reserved.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
key volatile
.B Output:
#define _key_volatile 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBlib\fP function [libs, ...]
.RS
Check to see if the library function \fIfunction\fP exists.
If the optional \fIlibs\fP are specified,
the test will try first without the libraries, then with
the first set of libraries specified linked in, then the next set, etc.
Sets of libraries to be tested are separated by commas.
If link libraries are specified, any value in the cache is ignored,
and the function is retested.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
lib gettext -lintl, -lintl -liconv
[Will first test gettext, then gettext -lintl,
 then gettext -lintl -liconv]
.B Output:
#define _lib_gettext 1
.Ve
.PP
Execute \fImkc.sh \-reqlib\fP after creating the output file
to output the libraries required for linking.
.PP
\fImkc.sh \-reqlib\fP creates the list of libraries required for linking
based on the output file.  This allows the user to modify
the output file and only the necessary libraries will be
linked in.
.PP
\fImkc.sh -reqlib\fP is executed with a command line argument of the
output file name created by \fImkconfig.sh\fP.
The output library file defaults to 'mkconfig.reqlibs',
but may be changed with the \-o command line option.
.PP
The string '_dollar_', if included in the library function name
will be replaced with the '$' symbol.
.RE
.TP
\fBmember\fP struct struct\-name member
.TP
\fBmember\fP union union\-name member
.TP
\fBmember\fP typedef\-name member
.RS
Check to see if \fImember\fP is a member of \fIstruct struct\-name\fP
or \fItypedef-name\fP.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
member struct statfs f_bsize
.B Output:
#define _mem_struct_statfs_f_bsize 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBmemberxdr\fP struct\-name member
.RS
Define the appropriate xdr function for \fIstruct\-name.member\fP.
The 'awk' program is a requirement for this directive.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
memberxdr getquota_args gqa_uid
.B Output:
#define xdr_gqa_uid xdr_int
#define _memberxdr_getquota_args_gqa_uid 1
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBnpt\fP function [library\-requirement]
.RS
Check to see if if \fIfunction\fP needs to have a prototype declared.
The optional \fIlibrary\-requirement\fP should be written
as: _lib_<funcname>.
If \fIlibrary\-requirement\fP does not exist, _npt_<function>
will be set to false in the output file.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
npt getopt
npt statfs _lib_statfs
.B Output:
#define _npt_getopt 0
#define _npt_statfs 0
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBprintf_long_double\fP [libs, ...]
.RS
Check if printing a long double requires a special format code.
Some libintl.h headers redefine sprintf(), and -lintl may be required.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
printf_long_double
.br
printf_long_double -lintl
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBsize\fP type\-name [libs, ...]
.RS
Check the size of type\-name.
Some libintl.h headers redefine printf(), and -lintl may be required.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
size long long
.br
size long long -lintl
.B Output:
#define _siz_long_long 8
.Ve
.RE
.TP
\fBtyp\fP type\-name
.RS
Check to see if a type\-name exists.  type\-name may be a type or a
structure.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
typ size_t
typ struct dqblk
.B Output:
#define _typ_size_t 1
#define _typ_struct_dqblk 1
.Ve
.RE
.RE
.TP
.B c\-include\-conflict
.RS
.TP
\fBinclude_conflict <header\-1> <header\-2>\fP
.RS
Check to see if there is a compile conflict when including two headers.
If there is a conflict, the check variable is set to 0.
.PP
.Vb
.B e.g.
include_conflict time.h sys/time.h
.B Output:
#define _inc_conflict__hdr_time__sys_time 1
.Ve
.RE
.RE
.SH See Also
iffe(1) autoconf(1) dist(7) mkconfig(7) mkconfig_env(7) mkconfig_d(7)
.SH Bugs
Send bug reports to: brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com
.SH Website
http://www.gentoo.com/di/mkconfig.html
.SH Author
This program is Copyright 2011 by Brad Lanam, Walnut Creek CA
.PP
Brad Lanam, Walnut Creek, CA (brad.lanam.di_at_gmail.com)
